Add jupyter instructions for Aurora (#661)
argonne-lcf/user-guides: docs/aurora/data-science/jupyter.md

> # Running JupyterLab and Notebook on Aurora

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Running JupyterLab and Jupyter Notebook on Aurora
```

> ALCF provides a [JupyterHub](https://jupyter.alcf.anl.gov/) for running JupyterLab and Notebook on Polaris and Sophia. While this service is not yet available on Aurora, you can still run JupyterLab and Notebook using ssh tunneling and port forwarding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ALCF provides a [JupyterHub](https://jupyter.alcf.anl.gov/) for running JupyterLab and Jupyter Notebook on Polaris and Sophia with minimal setup required from the user. While this service is not yet available on Aurora, users can still run JupyterLab and Notebook using SSH tunneling and port forwarding.
```

> ---

Reviewer: is there a reason to have several horizontal line dividers throughout this page? just curious

Author: not really. I am fine with removing any/all.

## Prerequisites

> Please note that you only need a terminal (to ssh into Aurora) and a browser on your local machine (laptop or desktop). All the required packages need to be installed on Aurora only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that you only need a terminal (to SSH into Aurora) and a browser on your local machine (laptop or desktop). All the required packages need to be installed on Aurora only.
```

I would suggest capitalizing SSH when using in a sentence as a verb, and not the command line command `ssh`

Author: I debated about it after DrDoc/gpt-4o recommended as well, but felt ssh is more natural and common. Though I am fine with the change.

---

## 1. Initial Setup
1. **SSH into Aurora**:
   The first step is to connect to Aurora through ssh. Note that tunneling or port forwarding is not required for this step.
   If you have a problem with this step, please check [Getting Started on Aurora](../getting-started-on-aurora.md).
   ```bash
   ssh <your-username>@aurora.alcf.anl.gov
   ```

2. **Create a Virtual Environment**:
   If you already have a Python environment, you can skip this step.
   ```bash
   python3 -m venv myenv
   ```
   Note that this command will create a directory called `myenv` in the current working directory, and `myenv` will also be the name of the virtual environment. You can change the name as you see fit.
   You can find more information about creating a virtual environment on Aurora [here](./python.md).

> 3. **Installing Required Packages**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Install Required Packages**:
```

keep same active voice as other steps

   The third step is to install `jupyterlab` and/or `notebook` as well as `ipykernel`.
   Note that you need to activate the virtual environment before installing the packages. Here we assume that the virtual environment is named `myenv` and is located in the current working directory.
   ```bash
   source myenv/bin/activate
   pip install jupyterlab notebook ipykernel
   ```
4. **Install IPython Kernel**:
   The fourth step is to install the IPython kernel for the current virtual environment. IPython kernels enable easily switching between different Python environments on JupyterLab and Notebook.
   ```bash
   python -m ipykernel install --user --name myenv
   ```
   Steps 2, 3, and 4 are only required once for each virtual environment.
---

> ## 2. Run JupyterLab on a Login Node (Not Recommended for Heavy Workloads)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2. Run JupyterLab on a Login Node 

    !!! warning
    
         This is not recommended for compute-intensive or memory-intensive workloads. Run the JupyterLab server on a compute node (see below section) if the workload is heavy.

```

   Submit an interactive job to request a compute node:
   ```bash
   qsub -l select=1 -l walltime=60:00 -A <project_name> -q <queue_name> -I
   ```
   You need to modify the `-A` and `-q` options to match your project name and queue name as well as the resources you need.

2. **Find Compute Node Hostname**:
   Once the interactive job starts, you will be connected to the compute node. You can check the hostname with:
   ```bash
   hostname
   ```
   If you are not running an interactive job, you can find the hostname of the compute node by checking the `qstat` output.
   First, you need to find the job ID of the job you are interested in. The following command will list all the jobs you have submitted. You need the ID of any one of the **running** jobs you are interested in.
   ```bash
   qstat -u <your_username>
   ```
   Then, we can find the hostname of the compute node by running:
   ```bash
   qstat -f <job_id>
   ```
   The hostname of the compute node will be displayed in the `exec_host` field. You can extract the hostname from the output with the following command:
   ```bash
   qstat -f <job_id> | awk -F '=' '/exec_host/ {print $2}' | tr '+' '\n' | cut -d '/' -f 1
   ```

>    This should give you a hostname like `x4603c0s0b0n0`. Note that you can ssh into the compute nodes only when your job is running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This should give you a hostname like `x4603c0s0b0n0`. Note that you can SSH into the compute nodes only when your job is running.
```

### Step 2: Start JupyterLab on the Compute Node
1. **SSH to the Compute Node**:
   From the login node:
   ```bash
   ssh <compute_node_hostname>
   ```
2. **Activate the Environment**:
   ```bash
   source <path_to_your_virtual_environment>/bin/activate
   ```
3. **Start JupyterLab**:
   ```bash
   jupyter lab --no-browser --port=9999
   ```

### Step 3: Set Up SSH Tunneling
1. **Tunnel from Compute Node to Local Machine**:
   On your local machine, run:
   ```bash
   ssh -L 9999:127.0.0.1:9999 -J <your-username>@aurora.alcf.anl.gov <your-username>@<compute_node_hostname>
   ```
   Please note that the `-J` option is used to specify the jump host, which is the Aurora login node.

>    - Replace `9999` with another port if it is unavailable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Replace `9999` with another port if it is unavailable.
```

Reviewer: should you mention how to check what ports are in use, etc. via `lsof`?

Author: Never had the problem of finding an open port, so didn't think about it.

2. **Access JupyterLab**:
   Open your browser and navigate to:
   ```bash
   http://localhost:9999/?token=<your-token>
   ```

---

> ## Notes
> - You can use `tmux` or `screen` to keep JupyterLab running if the SSH connection drops.
> - Please avoid running JupyterLab or Notebook on the login node for resource-intensive tasks; use compute nodes instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! tip

    You can use `tmux` or `screen` to keep JupyterLab running if the SSH connection drops.

```

no need to mention the resource-intensive comment again
